Marlee, you really told us your memories, early memories of childhood, the colourful memories,
that you've taken us through the journey of trauma to actually being where you are in Wales
and how you came to be in Wales.
So when you look back at your life now, what does resilience mean for you as a woman?
I think for me, coming to Wales, it was like coming home, honestly,
and I mean that, and I've never felt so at home as I do in Wales.
I've met some amazing friends. I've got friends in England as well, who I am in touch with,
because they were my friends from college days, so I'm still in touch with them.
One of the nurses I shared accommodation with, Carol Dodgson, and Ruth I shared a house with in Swansea.
But Wales to me has been home. It has been the best thing I ever did.
There's a cosiness about Wales that I think you don't find in England, and the people are friendly,
and it's very much like people looking after their own family. I see a lot of that in Wales,
more so than I've seen in communities in England even, but I don't know whether that's just my biasness,
but I think it's just meant everything, and I work at the university now, and to me that's like a community in itself,
and most people in the university, you know, we all look out for each other.
There's a lot of kindness, people will help each other out, so I've helped people out and took on their lecturing,
if, for example, I've been needed to lecture and somebody's fallen ill or whatever,
and I find I just love learning as well, and I've worked in research, and with research you just never stop learning,
and I've always had this passion about education, and that comes from mum and dad both saying,
dad's saying girls have to be educated as well as boys, and mum always said, mum never had a chance for an education,
she always wanted to do that, but of course as a teenager she had to stop to get married,
but she learned to read and write Gujarati, which was a total blessing, because without that she would have been lost,
so she found solace in prayers and the Bhagavad Gita and the faith books, and I just never really stopped learning,
so I studied a bit of Egyptology, I went to Spanish class, I learned a bit of Spanish,
my Hindi is not perfect but I can manage, I understand everything, but my expression, my Hindu friends would say to me,
oh your Hindi is very sweet, which means it's a bit sort of broken probably, but I've got Punjabi friends,
I've got Hindi friends, I've got all sorts of friends, English friends, Welsh friends, and Wales to me is just magnificent in its beauty and the beaches,
I found my solace through all this trauma in the fact that nature, you know, the sea is literally ten minutes away from here,
and I find the sea has all the answers, walks, woodlands, so many walks around here, Klein Gardens, the Gowers not far,
I just find it such a stunning beautiful area, North Wales as well, but I don't know North Wales as well as I do South Wales,
I've tried to do everything that I was told I shouldn't do, like I've always been frightened of water,
so I overcame that fear and I trained as a scuba diver, and I also lectured and taught sports diving because I've always been quite defiant as well,
well why can't I do it, if I'm a girl why can't I do this, why can't I do that, you know I've been to Antarctica on a holiday,
and I've tried to do extreme types holidays, I've cycled a lot of the Gower, and I've pushed myself physically,
and I think that's the way I've overcome things, trauma by actually working my body physically, pushing myself,
and overall I have a lot of empathy for people who've suffered, I also have sensitivity, but I also need time for calmness and peace,
I can't be with people all the time, because I find I can take on other people's feelings, but I recognise that as a child carer literally,
so I know I'm quite sensitive like that, and I do really feel for people who've been widowed in Asian Indian communities,
because I know what that means, and it's sad to say that I also accept that there's assaults and abuses as a common place,
which is also sad to say, but I just found my home here, and also I've done things like mindfulness, I've done aromatherapy,
I think without even knowing it, and I've journaled, written a lot, I've done creative art, but I think without knowing what I was actually really doing,
I sort of somehow have found solace in all these things, and I think in a way without even analysing it,
I was just always busy, busy running, or busy cycling, or busy doing this, and I think training, because when you're underwater,
if you're scuba diving, you can't think of other things, you've literally got to concentrate on what you're doing, because it could make a big difference,
so there's no wondering, because in normal everyday life your mind can wander back to that,
and to me it's not about the story, I think the story is more important than me, that's what I think, and I think it's a case of what can I do with the story,
and I think you can do a lot with it, because I think you can understand, because women in India for example can't talk about trauma,
divorce is a big no, no, and it's always a woman's fault, with any divorce, it's never the man's fault,
a woman should always try to make things work, and I think I can bring understanding, because women are just being assaulted, abused,
and they're just so petrified of a divorce, and even a son whose mother gets divorced, even the son could turn against the mother and say,
you know, you got divorced and it's your fault, so I just feel bringing a voice is so much to people who don't have a voice, who can't speak,
there's lots of women in India who will put up with beatings, regularly domestic violence, because they're not able to speak, they're not allowed to speak,
so I think giving voice is what I would bring with this story, and it's not really about me as such, I'm just the vehicle, the vessel if you like,
and I think for me resilience is all about, in part, defiance as well, why shouldn't we, why shouldn't we do all these things, why shouldn't we scuba dive,
why shouldn't we do this, why do we have to have defined roles as a woman, and yes, I still like my cooking and I still enjoy all those sorts of things,
but I think to be who you are and to reach your fullest potential, I think you also have to let go of who you were and what you were,
and that doesn't define me anymore, I'm not defined by what happened to me, it's just part of the story, but it's made me a person who I wouldn't have been had I have had a nicey-nicey upbringing with my father alive,
I would never have believed anybody who would tell me these sorts of things that I've just said, I would never have believed it, so I think that is the gift, I think it's the voice,
and voice for other people, not just for me, that's what I would like to bring.
So what I would say, the last thing I would say to my mother, if I could say it to her, I would be, it would be that we are both alright, you both, you wanted both of us to have an education,
stand on our two feet, she always used to say stand on your two feet, and here we are, we are standing, and it's a credit to her, and considering what we went through, we've both done well academically and in other ways, we've come to be our own fullest people.
And what would you say to all the male members who turned away from you at a time that your mother needed them the most?
I would say that I think forgiveness is very hard, but I would hope that they would reflect, and I'm no longer driven by vengeance and hatred as I was in my younger years and my teenage years,
and I would just say try and find compassion in your heart somewhere, there must be some somewhere, that's all I can say.